*Course Proposal – EDT 610 Distance learning, blended classes, and
virtual schools 7*

**ADELPHI UNIVERSITY FACULTY SENATE ACADEMIC AFFAIRS COMMITTEE**

\

New Course Proposal

**EDT 610 Distance learning, blended classes, and virtual schools**

\

 **NEW COURSE NUMBER REQUESTED**: EDT 610 

\
\

 **NEW COURSE TITLE REQUESTED:********

Distance learning, blended classes, and virtual schools

****

\

 **POSSIBLE INSTRUCTOR(S)**: ***PLEASE LIST LAST NAME(S)*********

Martin, Curinga, Eichenholtz

 **CATALOG DESCRIPTION: (Limit = 50 words)**

Students study online learning in distance and blended classes, and
in“virtual” schools — in both higher education and K-12 settings.
Looking at pedagogy, best practices, interactivity and student-centered
design, this class considers the positive and negative potential of
online learning in terms of universal accessibility, teacher
development, economic sustainability. (49 words)

\

 **PROPOSED BY**: ***PLEASE LIST SPONSORS & PHONE EXTENSIONS*********

Matthew Curinga, x8623

 **EFFECTIVE START TERM DATE REQUESTED:***12/09*******

 **RATIONALE:** 

Online, blended and web-enhanced learning is a major part of both higher
education and K-12 teaching, learning. Students need to become aware of
this new method of teaching, learning and instructional delivery.
Students who wish to become educational professionals need to understand
the pedagogy, best practices, interactivity and student-centered
instructional design principles required for quality online, blended and
web-enhanced learning. Students should also have an understanding of the
political issues surrounding online, blended and web-enhanced learning
such as cost, technical infrastructure, teacher development, student and
teacher support and profit.

\

 **COURSE GOALS & OBJECTIVES:********

Students will:

-   Understand the basic tenets, movement and use of online, blended and
    web-enhanced learning in K-12 and higher education.

-   Understand various technologies used for teaching and learning and
    course delivery in online, blended and web-enhanced environments.

-   Apply principles for the development of engaging and interactive
    online, blended and web-enhanced curriculum

-   Design learning environments that address the challenges of creating
    interaction and community in online and virtual environments

-   Apply best practices for teaching in online, blended and
    web-enhanced environments.

-   Identify some of the political implications surrounding online
    learning and virtual schools

 **Pre-REQUISITES/Co-REQUISITES:********

NONE.

 **REQUIRED TEXTS (IN UNIVERSITY LIBRARY COLLECTION):**

Cavanaugh, C. (2007). *What**works**in K-12 online learning* (1st ed.).
Eugene Or.: International Society for Technology in Education.

 **REQUIRED TEXTS (NOT HELD IN UNIVERSITY LIBRARY COLLECTION):**

NONE.

 **BIBLIOGRAPHY AND/OR OTHER ADDITIONAL RESOURCES:**

iNACOL (International Association for K-12 Online Learning) National
Standards of Quality for Online Courses. Web site for online books:
[http://www.inacol.org/research/bookstore/index.php](http://www.inacol.org/research/bookstore/index.php)

\

 **OUTLINE of COURSE ACTIVITIES:**

### Session 1:Introduction to online, blended and web-enhanced learning

Students will be introduced to the basic tenets of online, blended and
web-mediated learning. They will explore the use of this type of
learning and instructional delivery in both higher education and K-12
environments. Students will be introduced to The Sloan Consortium
([http://sloanconsortium.org](http://sloanconsortium.org/)) which they
will use throughout the semester as a source to go to for data, best
practices and general research on online learning for higher education.

*Readings due: Patrick, ch 1*

### Session 2: Evaluation of online, blended and web-enhanced models

Students will compare and contrast the different types of learning to
determine the pros, cons and future potentials for teaching and
learning. Students will also evaluate what online, blended and
web-enhanced learning means for educational institutions in terms of
cost, technical infrastructure, faculty/teacher development,
student/faculty/teacher support and profit.

*Readings due: Patrick, ch 2*

### Session 3: The notion of anytime and anyplace learning

Students will look at and challenge the notion of where learning occurs.
Can it take place at anytime and at anyplace or must it be within the
confines of a brick and mortar building/classroom? What are the
challenges of maintaining a quality education as learning is moved
beyond the walls of the classroom? How have new mobile technologies
allowed us to learn and teach beyond the classroom?

*Readings due: iNACOL*

### Session 4: Technology for online and blended learning

Students will explore the different types of technologies used by higher
ed and K-12 institutions to deliver courses and to connect and engage
students. Students will look at the use of both proprietary and open
source course/learning management systems and will review the strengths
and weaknesses of each. Students will also look at the use of blogs,
wikis and social networking tools for maintaining class connection and
interactivity.

*Readings due: Ragan, Part I: Getting Started*

### Session 5: Technology for online and blended learning - part 2

Students will explore the different types web conferencing applications
such as Adobe Connect Pro and Skype and Second Life as well as
videoconferencing tools for real-time meetings. Students will also
explore the use of web-based video such as iTunesU, podcasting and
textbook video resources.

*Readings due: Ragan, Part II: During Teaching*

### Session 6: Online, blended and web-enhanced kearning in k-12 and higher education

Students will explore, compare and contrast online, blended and
web-enhanced learning in K-12 and higher education. Why are these types
of learning important, what are the challenges and what is the purpose.

*Readings due: Patrick, ch 3*

### Session 7: Virtual schools

This session looks at the movement to create "virtual schools";
examining the process of creating an entire school experience online —
not just some of the instructional and course components.

*Readings due: DiPietro; Hew*

### Session 8: Student centered learning

This session will cover how we teach students in online, blended and
web-enhanced environments. Students will learn to design instruction for
online, blended and web-enhanced environments that is student centered,
interactive and incorporate active learning.

*Readings due: Patrick, ch 4 & 5*

### Session 9: Interactivity, communication and active learning

Students will learn how to design curriculum for online, blended and
web-enhance environments that incorporates interactivity, communication
and active learning.

*Readings due: Patrick, ch 9*

### Session 10: Differentiation and special needs

Students will learn how to design online, blended and web-enhanced
instruction that incorporates differentiation for multiple intelligences
and special needs.

*Readings due: Patrick, ch 8*

### Session 11: Assessment

Students will learn about assessing students in online, blended and
web-enhanced learning environments.

*Readings due: Quality Matters*

### Session 12: Teacher professional development

Students will learn about professional development for
teachers/professors teaching in online, blended and web-enhanced
environments. Students will learn about what core competencies
teachers/professors should have before teaching in online or blended
courses.

*Readings due: Patrick, ch 10*

### Session 13: Curriculum development

Students will learn about the best practices for designing online,
blended and web-enhanced curriculum.

*Readings due: Ragan, Part III: Putting It All Together*

### Session 14: Politics of online and blended learning

Students will look at the various issues surrounding online and blended
learning. Issues such as profit, quality of education, classroom space
issues and quality of teachers/professors will be investigated.

*Readings due: Patrick, ch 11*

### Session 15: Final presentations

\
\

 **MODE OF DELIVERY**

**Check all envisioned currently:**

 **Traditional (0-29% content on-line)**

 **Blended (30-79% content on-line)**

 **On-line (80+% content on-line)** ****

****

 **STUDENT EVALUATION METHODS:**

**Class Participation (15%)**

Students will be assessed on quality and depth of class discussions, as
carried out through synchronous and asynchronous online activities.
Class participation will be based on weekly session topics and
collaborative work with class members.

\
**Reflection/Response Papers (50%)**

Students will be asked to respond to a special topic or issues related
to weekly topics by way of a reflection paper. The instructor will
review these papers to evaluate student mastery of the course goals, and
will provide written feedback to indicate how students can improve their
reflection as the semester progresses.

*Sample questions for reflective papers:*

-   **(session 2)**Which types of students do you think benefit the most
    for *asynchronous* online classes, where students do not need to
    “meet” online/virtually at any set time? Which type of learners
    would find this format the most challenging?

-   **(Session 3)** Can students learn core content at anytime and at
    anyplace? Do you think it is best that they learn this content
    outside of the classroom or within the classroom? What are the
    challenges of maintaining a quality education as learning is moved
    beyond the physical classroom?

-   **(session 7)** Would you like to attend a fully virtual school, as
    a student? Would you like to work in one as a teacher? Referring to
    the cases we have read about, explain why or why not.

-   **(session 9)** As a current or future teacher, what do you think
    are the challenges of supporting robust collaboration and
    professional development when working in a primarily online or
    virtual school?

**Final Culminating Project (35%)**

Students will write a design plan for implementation of an online,
blended or virtual program. Students will integrate all of the
components learned in this class, including plans for program/course
design, student interactivity and communication, student assessment,
program assessment, technical infrastructure, learning technologies,
cost, faculty/teacher development and student/faculty/teacher support.

\

 **OTHER REQUIRED READINGS:**

DiPietro, M. Virtual School Pedagogy: The Instructional Practices of
K-12 Virtual School Teachers. Journal of Educational Computing Research
v. 42 no. 3 (2010) p. 327-54

Hew, K. F., et. al., Use of three-dimensional (3-D) immersive virtual
worlds in K-12 and higher education settings: A review of the research
[Part of a special issue: Crossing boundaries: Learning and teaching in
virtual worlds]. British Journal of Educational Technology v. 41 no. 1
(January 2010) p. 33-55

iNACOL (International Association for K-12 Online Learning) National
Standards of Quality for Online Courses. Web site:
[http://www.inacol.org/research/nationalstandards](http://www.inacol.org/research/nationalstandards)

Quality Matters Course Rubric Standards (2008-2010 edition).\
[http://qminstitute.org/home/Public Library/About
QM/RubricStandards2008-2010.pdf](http://qminstitute.org/home/Public%20Library/About%20QM/RubricStandards2008-2010.pdf)

Ragan, Larry. Best Practices for Teaching Online. Available at:
[http://cnx.org/content/col10453/latest](http://cnx.org/content/col10453/latest).
.

 **SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONAL EQUIPMENT NEEDED FOR THIS COURSE:**

NONE.

**FOR DEGREE AUDIT PURPOSES, SPECIFY:**

\

 **MAJOR(S) (Use 3 letter major code): EDT********

\

 **DEGREE (BA, BS…):*****MA*********

\

 **CATEGORY: VARIABLE ELECTIVE********

\

\

**PRIMARY ACTIVITY INFORMATION:**

\

 **PRIMARY ACTIVITY:*****SEM*********

***(See list below and replace XXX as appropriate)***

\

 **CONTACT HOURS: 3**************

\

 **CREDIT CODE:*****F*********

***(Credit codes: F=Fixed, V=Variable, A=Alternating [e.g. 3, 6 reads 3
or 6 credits])***

\

 **STUDENT CREDIT:*****3*********

\

 **MAX CAP REQUESTED:*****15*********

\

 **GRADE TYPE:*****R***

***[Grade types: N=Non-Graded (usually labs), P=Pass/Fail (not for
Required Course or IND Study), R=Grade Only (A, B, C …), BLANK=Any
Grade]***

\

 **SCHEDULE NOTES:***********XXXX*********

***(Replace with letter code for specific Registrar Schedule Notes
wanted, if any)***

\

 **TEACHING CREDITS:*****3*********

***(Instructor credit – usually same as Student Credit)***

\

 **FREE FORM NOTES:*****INSTRUCTORS APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR NON-EDUCATION
MAJORS*********

***(Replace as appropriate)***

\

\

**Consideration/Approval Chain:**

\

\1. Proposal Originator =\>
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Name, Phone Extension Date Approved

\

\2. Unit Acad. Affairs Com =\>
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
Name, Phone Extension Date Approved

\

\3. Unit Faculty Approval =\>
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Name, Phone Extension Date Approved

\

\4. Library Dean =\>
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Name, Phone Extension Date Approved

\

\5. Other unit O.K.

(if appropriate)=\>
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Name, Phone Extension Date Approved

\

\6. Unit Dean =\>
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Name, Phone Extension Date Approved

\

\7. Faculty Senate Academic Affairs Committee (Send signed original and
11 copies to Secretary, c/o Faculty Senate Office, HHE 122, for
routing).

\

=\>
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Name, Phone Extension Date Approved

\

\

\

