*Course Proposal – EDT 618 Research and evaluation of educational
technology 6*

**ADELPHI UNIVERSITY FACULTY SENATE ACADEMIC AFFAIRS COMMITTEE**

\

New Course Proposal

**EDT 618 Research and evaluation of educational technology**

\

\

 **NEW COURSE NUMBER REQUESTED**: EDT 618 

\
\

 **NEW COURSE TITLE REQUESTED:********

Research and evaluation of educational technology******

\

 **POSSIBLE INSTRUCTOR(S)**: ***PLEASE LIST LAST NAME(S)*********

Curinga, Andrews, Martin

 **CATALOG DESCRIPTION: (Limit = 50 words)**

In this course, students investigate methods for determining if a given
technology contributes to a stronger educational experience. Reviewing
the body of research on educational technology, students will probe the
merits of different methodologies. Students learn how to develop good
research questions and choose methodologies to conduct their own
investigations. (50 words)

 **PROPOSED BY**: ***PLEASE LIST SPONSORS & PHONE EXTENSIONS*********

Matthew Curinga, x8623

\

 **EFFECTIVE START TERM DATE REQUESTED:**12*/02*******

 **RATIONALE:** 

This research seminar exposes students to the general methods of social
science research used in education settings as well as to the specific
research paradigms common to technology research. They need these skills
to be effective consumers of research; to make informed technology
choices and to stay abreast of current trends. Further, they will be
able to develop methodologically sound frameworks to test and evaluate
the effectiveness of their own technology initiatives in the field.

 **COURSE GOALS & OBJECTIVES:********

This course has two main goals: 1) to develop students' abilities to
read and write about scholarly research in the area of educational
technology, and 2) to foster their ability to conduct academic research
and less formal evaluations of educational technology.

Students will be able to:

-   read common statistical terms and measures (e.g. ANOVA)

-   comprehend the major trends and questions in educational research,
    with a focus on technology

-   use data mining and business intelligent techniques to spot trends
    in data and implement continuous improvement

-   read and evaluate qualitative educational research

    -   ethnographic approaches

    -   interviews

    -   action research and design research

    -   conversation and discourse analysis

    -   mixed methods

-   implement online surveys

-   use digital tools for analyzing data (spreadsheets, SPSS, SQL
    databases)

-   use digital tools for visualizing and reporting numerical
    information

-   design measures to evaluate the success of technology initiatives

 **Pre-REQUISITES/Co-REQUISITES:********

Permission of instructor.

 **REQUIRED TEXTS (IN UNIVERSITY LIBRARY COLLECTION):**

NONE..

 **REQUIRED TEXTS (NOT HELD IN UNIVERSITY LIBRARY COLLECTION):**

McMillan, James H. 2007. *Educational Research: Fundamentals for the
Consumer (5*^*th*^*Edition).*Boston MA: Allyn & Bacon. ISBN 0205508308
**(the library has an earlier edition)**

Ladson-Billings, G (ed.). 2006. *Education research in the public
interest: Social justice, action, and policy.* New York NY: Teachers
College Press. ISBN 0807747041.

 **BIBLIOGRAPHY AND/OR OTHER ADDITIONAL RESOURCES:**

Bernhardt, Victoria. 2004. *Data Analysis for Continuous School
Improvement.*Eye on Education. ISBN 1930556748. **(not in library)**

Bernhardt, Victoria. 2008. *Data, Data, Everywhere.*Eye on Education.
ISBN 1596671025. **(not in library)**

Collins, Allan. 2009. *Rethinking Education in the Age of Technology:
The Digital Revolution and Schooling in America.*New York NY: Teachers
College Press. ISBN 0807750026.

Elliott, J. 1991. *Action research for educational change.*Philadelphia:
Open University Press. ISBN 0335096905.

Few, Stephen. 2009. *Now You See It: Simple Visualization Techniques for
Quantitative Analysis.*Analytics Press. ISBN 0970601980. **(not in
library)**

Haertel, Geneva D.. 2003. *Evaluating Educational Technology: Effective
Research Designs for Improving Learning.*Teachers College Press. ISBN
0807743305. **(not in library)**

Kelly, A.. 2004. Design research in education: Yes, but is it
methodological? *Journal of the Learning Sciences*, *13* (*1*)115–128.

Reeves, T. C. 2005. Design research: A socially responsible approach to
instructional technology research in higher education. *Journal of
Computing in Higher Education*, *16* (*2*)96–115.

Tufte, E. 2006. *Beautiful Evidence.*Graphics Press. ISBN 0961392177.

Tufte, E. 1997. *Visual & Statistical Thinking: Displays of Evidence for
Decision Making.*Graphics Press. ISBN 0961392134. **(not in library)**

Willis, Jerry. 2008. *Qualitative research methods in education and
educational technology.*Information Age Publishing. ISBN 9781930608542.
**(not in library)**

\

 **OUTLINE of COURSE ACTIVITIES:**

**Part I: Introduction & quantitative research**

### Session 1: Introduction to educational research

*Readings due: Boote*

### Session 2: Locating and reviewing relevant research

*Readings due: McMillan, ch 1*

### Session 3: Hypothesis and variables

*Readings due: McMillan, ch 2;”What Should Count as Educational
Research: Notes Toward a New Paradigm,” Jean Anyon in Ladson-Billings*

### Session 4: Participants and subjects

*Readings due: McMillan, ch 5; “Public Interest and the Interests of
White People Are Not the Same: Assessment, Education Policy and Racism”,
David Gillborn in Ladson-Billings*

### Session 5: Research ethics

*Readings due: “Interrupting the Right: On Doing Critical Educational
Work in Conservative Times”, Michael Apple in Ladson-Billings*

### Session 6: Experimental design

*Readings due: McMillan, ch 9*

**Part II: Qualitative research**

### Session 7:Action research & design research

*Readings due: Collins*

### Session 8: Survey-based research

*Readings due: McMillan, ch 8*

### Session 9: Ethnographic research

### Session 10: Case studies

*Readings due: McMillan, ch 11*

### Session 11: Mixed methods

*Readings due: McMillan, ch 12*

**Part III: Data integration and visualization**

### Session 12: Data mining and "business intelligence"

*Readings due: Baker*

### Session 13: Continuous data integration in schools

*Readings due: Bernhardt (2004) [selections]*

### Session 14: Data visualization

*Readings due: Tufte (1997) [selections]*

### Session 15:Final presentations

Students will present their research designs and receive feedback from
the instructor and their peers.

\

 **MODE OF DELIVERY**

**Check all envisioned currently:**

**** **Traditional (0-29% content on-line)**

 **Blended (30-79% content on-line)**

**On-line (80+% content on-line)** ****

****

 **STUDENT EVALUATION METHODS:**

**Assignment 1 — Review of literature (40%)**

Each semester, the seminar will collaboratively author a review of
literature related to a major research area in educational technology.
Examples of topics for the literature review:

-   technology and school reform

-   technology and special education

-   technology and global development

-   educational equity and technology

Through this assignment, students will be evaluated on their ability to
understand, analyze, and synthesize research from a range of sources
using a variety of research methodologies.

**Assignment 2 — Research design** **(60%)**

For the final assignment, each student will develop a novel research
study to explore an area of educational technology. Students will be
encouraged to develop research that they can implement in their current
work positions or in their upcoming fieldwork. The research design will
be evaluated on:

-   the importance of the research question

-   the clarity of the proposed study

-   the appropriateness of the methodology chosen

-   the feasibility of the study

 **OTHER REQUIRED READINGS:**

Baker, R. S.J.D. 2009. The state of educational data mining in 2009: A
review and future visions. *Journal of Educational Data Mining*, *1*
(*1*)3–17.

Boote, D. N. 2005. Scholars before researchers: On the centrality of the
dissertation literature review in research preparation. *Educational
Researcher*, *34* (*6*)3.

Collins, A., Joseph, D. and Bielaczyc, K. 2004. Design research:
Theoretical and methodological issues. *Journal of the learning
Sciences*, *13* (*1*)15–42.

 **SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONAL EQUIPMENT NEEDED FOR THIS COURSE:**

NONE.

**FOR DEGREE AUDIT PURPOSES, SPECIFY:**

\

 **MAJOR(S) (Use 3 letter major code): EDT********

\

 **DEGREE (BA, BS…):*****MA*********

\

 **CATEGORY:*****REQUIRED*********

***(Specify whether REQUIRED, VARIABLE REQUIRED, ELECTIVE, or REQUIRED
FOR OTHER MAJOR)***

\

\

**PRIMARY ACTIVITY INFORMATION:**

\

 **PRIMARY ACTIVITY:*****SEM*********

***(See list below and replace XXX as appropriate)***

\

 **CONTACT HOURS: 3**************

\

 **CREDIT CODE:*****F*********

***(Credit codes: F=Fixed, V=Variable, A=Alternating [e.g. 3, 6 reads 3
or 6 credits])***

\

 **STUDENT CREDIT:*****3*********

\

 **MAX CAP REQUESTED:*****15*********

\

 **GRADE TYPE: R********

***[Grade types: N=Non-Graded (usually labs), P=Pass/Fail (not for
Required Course or IND Study), R=Grade Only (A, B, C …), BLANK=Any
Grade]***

\

 **SCHEDULE NOTES:***********XXXX*********

***(Replace with letter code for specific Registrar Schedule Notes
wanted, if any)***

\

 **TEACHING CREDITS:*****3*********

***(Instructor credit – usually same as Student Credit)***

\

 **FREE FORM NOTES:*****INSTRUCTORS APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR NON-EDUCATION
MAJORS*********

***(Replace as appropriate)***

\

\

**Consideration/Approval Chain:**

\

\1. Proposal Originator =\>
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Name, Phone Extension Date Approved

\

\2. Unit Acad. Affairs Com =\>
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
Name, Phone Extension Date Approved

\

\3. Unit Faculty Approval =\>
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Name, Phone Extension Date Approved

\

\4. Library Dean =\>
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Name, Phone Extension Date Approved

\

\5. Other unit O.K.

(if appropriate)=\>
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Name, Phone Extension Date Approved

\

\6. Unit Dean =\>
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Name, Phone Extension Date Approved

\

\7. Faculty Senate Academic Affairs Committee (Send signed original and
11 copies to Secretary, c/o Faculty Senate Office, HHE 122, for
routing).

\

=\>
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Name, Phone Extension Date Approved

\

