% Educational information systems and networks
% Matthew X. Curinga


**Description:** From a foundation of computer networks and systems, this course expands
to cover instructional technology infrastructure: file systems, users,
wired and wireless networks, email, web servers, computer labs, and
common educational software services. This course focuses on Free
Software; where the source code is free to use, study, or modify. (50
words)

\

GOALS & OBJECTIVES
------------------

The Educational Technology Specialist certification track must prepare
graduates to be school-based technology leaders. One of their main
duties will be to install and maintain local computer networks,
workstations, and school servers. Other graduates will be developing
networked learning solutions, requiring the fundamental knowledge and
skills covered in this course.

Students in this course develop a basic understanding of computer
operating systems and digital networks. Upon completing this course they
will be able to:

-   set up a secure, network computing environment

-   effectively use the basic tools of Unix/Linux computing environments

-   implement techniques for administering group and user permissions

-   install and troubleshoot hardware and software infrastructure for
    networked and internet computing

-   configure various server-side applications to support teaching and
    learning

-   identify the ethical and legal concerns surrounding school
    information systems


Required Books
--------------

Esteve, J. 2009. _[The GNU/Linux Operating System.*Free Technology
Academy](http://ftacademy.org/materials/fsm/2#1)_. Barcelona. 

Kurose, J. (2010). *Computer networkingâ€¯: a top-down approach* (5^th^
ed.). Boston: Addison-Wesley. ISBN 0136079679.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
------------

Adelstein, Tom. 2007. *Linux System Administration.* O'Reilly Media. ISBN
0596009526.

Gift, Noah. 2008. *Python for Unix and Linux System
Administration.*O'Reilly Media. ISBN 0596515820.

Peterson, Larry L. 2011. *Computer Networks, Fifth Edition: A Systems
Approach.*Morgan Kaufmann. ISBN 0123850592.

Tanenbaum, Andrew S. 2002. *Computer Networks.*Prentice Hall. ISBN
0130661023.


Class sessions
--------------

### Networks and the internet

Students will get an overview of current network computing scene. They
will learn how to install the Ubunutu GNU/Linux operating system.

### The linux operating system

This session focuses on the organization of the Linux OS. Students will
also learn about package management, maintaining and upgrading software,
Gnome and KDE windowing systems.

### UNIX tools and utilities

Students will learn the basic tools of the linux shell: text editors
(emacs/vi/nano), head/tail/more, cat, man, etc.

### Users and groups

Students will look at managing users and groups, superuser and sudo,
password files, and more.

### File systems

Students will format drives, create file permissions, use uname,
symbolic links, rsync, and backup strategies.

### Ethics & school computer systems

Reviewing several cases of controversies in school systems, students
will consider the ethical and legal considerations of administering
computer systems in a school setting, including maintaining the privacy
of sensitive data, equitable distribution of computing resources, design
for universal access, and more.

### Network protocols

This session introduces Interent Protocol (IP), the concept of network
layers, TCP, UDP, DNS, and routing.

### Local area networks

Students practice with local area networks: distributed file systems,
DHCP, print servers, and user management.

### Wireless networks

This session looks at wireless networking standards, routers and access
points, and wireless security protocols.

### computer security

This session looks more specifically at the security of computer
networks, including firewalls, hardening servers, virus protection, and
encryption.

### The educational computer lab

Students will learn strategies for maintaining computer labs, including
Linux Terminal Server.

### Web servers

Students configure the Apache HTTP server, learn about configuration
files, and plugins, security settings for Apache.

### Database servers

Students learn how to set up databases with mySQL, grant user
permissions, and use the mysql CLI client to run sql commands.

### Educational applications and services

This session looks at installing and configuring some of the popular
applications used in learning environments: Moodle, WordPress, Drupal,
Kaltura, etc.

### Cloud computing

Examines the trend towards cloud computing; what this paradigm really
means. Also, looks at the benefits and drawbacks of "cloud" vendors,
such as Amazon EC2.


Grades & Assignments
--------------------

Students will have weekly homework assignments. These assignments will
measure the discrete skills and knowledge covered each week. In
addition, there will be practice-based midterm and final exams, where
students will have to use their own server space to install and
configure network and application services.

*Grading:*

-   Homework (30%)
-   Midterm (30%)
-   Final project (40%)


